Excel is a very popular
tool to create graphs.
In addition, ASP comes with a set
of graphical tools for data graphs.
In this video, we briefly
discuss graphs in Excel and ASP.
We also take this opportunity to discuss
common ways to encode numerical values and
compare them.
In the second course of this
specialization we discussed six graphs for
exploratory data analysis.
For categorical data, we introduced
the bar graphs and pie charts.
For quantitative data, we introduced
histograms, boxplots and timeplots.
In addition,
we also introduced scatter plot as a way
to examine relationships between
a pair of quantitative variables.
Excel does not include queues for
all these graphs,
in particular histograms and boxplots
cannot be easily created in Excel,
even though it is possible to create them
by following some carefully planned steps.
The graphing tools in ASP
can create all these graphs.
Excel comes with many other graphs
that were not mentioned before,
such as tree map, pivot chart,
waterfall chart, and the win/loss graph.
We choose not to discuss
them in detail here.
Several additional graphs are available
in ASP, including histograms and
boxplots I mentioned earlier.
Even though, I choose not to go into
details, I suggest that you explore them.
If you are reasonably comfortable
with creating graphs in Excel,
creating graphs in ASP
should be easy to master.
An important decision with creating graphs
in Excel is the way to encode data.
There are many alternatives
including points, lines,
bars, boxes, shapes, and color intensity.
Points are also use to represent
a single value as in a dot plot or
pair of values as in a scatter plot.
Lines are primarily used for two purposes.
First, it can be used to collect
individual values, second,
it can also be used to
display overall pattern.
An important example is the trend
line in a scatter plot.
Bars are typically used to
represent a single value.
Note that even though bars are two
dimensional objects with both height and
width, one of the dimensions, the width is
typically not used to encode a data value.
Boxes are often used to
represent ranges of values.
The most well known example is a boxplot.
It is also possible to use
shapes represent single values.
For example,
a larger circle represent a bigger value.
Finally, it is also possible to use color
intensity to represent a single values.
Usually, darker colors are used
to represent higher value.
And the last two, shapes and
color intensity are four last
common in the first four.
Now, let me discuss two examples
to illustrate the concentrations when
choosing the way to encode data.
The first example concerns
time series data.
Here, I show the same time series
data using three different ways
to enclose the data values.
Points are using the first one.
Bars are using the second one and
the lines are using the last one.
Which one is better?
Experts often suggest that
we avoid using points.
Well, bar and lines can both be
appropriate they serve different purposes.
Bars are often used when we want
to emphasize individual values and
the lines are used when we
want to emphasize a trend.
Here's the rationale for
the recommendation.
Points have small visual weight and
do not help show the sequential
nature of the time series data.
Bars have large visual weight and
make individual values stand out.
Finally, adding a line
helps correct the issue.
Therefore, depending on
the purpose of our graph
we should carefully choose
the type of graph we use.
In Excel, if we want to use bars
we need to choose bar graph.
If we want to use lines we
need to choose line graph.
Our second example concerns graphs
used to show distribution of data.
Recall that a distribution shows how a set
of data spreads across the entire range.
You can choose to use several
different ways to encode the data.
If we use points the graph is
typically called strip plot.
If we use lines,
the graph is called density curve.
If we use bars,
the graph is called histogram.
Finally, if we use boxes,
the graph is called boxplot.
Note that the different ways to show
distribution have different strengths.
The strip plot uses points.
It is great for
showing individual values in the data set.
However, it becomes infeasible
when data set is relatively large.
The line in the density curve features
the shape of the distribution.
The bars in the histogram naturally
shows the frequency of each interval
within the data range.
Boxplot is an exceptionally simple graph
that features simple summary
statistics of the data.
Which one we should choose
depends on the purpose.
Therefore, histograms and
the boxplots are most popular.
Histograms show a lot more
details than boxplots.
However, boxplots can be great choice as
it succinctly summarizes a data set and
are also great for side-by-side
comparison for several related data sets.